# Logic

## Overview

`chalk-engine` solves a `Goal` using a depth-first search. When asked to solve a
particular `Goal` it hasn't seen before, it will first ask the [`Context`] to
generate a set of program clauses, that get turned into `Strand`s, that could
solve that goal. Otherwise, if asked to solve a `Goal` it has seen before, it
will select the existing table.

Once a table is selected, it will pick a `Strand` and a subgoal of that
`Strand`, try to solve that `Goal`, repeating the process.

When an `Answer` is found for a `Goal`, it is merged into the parent `Strand`,
or returned if it was the root `Goal`. It will then go on to pick the next
subgoal of the `Strand` and continue on.

If at any point the solving stops being "successful" (i.e. we definitely found
something to be unsolvable), the solving is restarted at the root `Goal`.

## The stack

In order to detect cycles (talked more about later), as well as keep track of
the selected `Strand` for each table, `chalk-engine` stores a [`Stack`] on the
`Forest`. Whenever a new goal is selected, a `StackEntry` is pushed onto the
`Stack`, as well as the the "time" (which also gets incremented) that it was
pushed. This "time" can be compared later to check if all the `Strands` of a
`Table` have been checked in a single solve.

As either `Answer`s are found for the selected `Table`, entries on the stack are
`pop`ed. If something is found to be unsolvable, the complete stack is unwound.

## Table creation

As mentioned before, whenever a new `Goal` is encounted, a new `Table` is
created to store current and future answers. First, the `Goal` is converted into
an [`HhGoal`]. If it can be simplified, then a `Strand` with one or more
subgoals will be generated and can be followed as above. Otherwise, if it is a
`DomainGoal` (see above), then
[`program_clauses`](https://rust-lang.github.io/chalk/chalk_engine/context/trait.ContextOps.html#tymethod.program_clauses)
is called and each clause is converted into a `Strand` and can be followed.

## `root_answer` and `ensure_root_answer`

The `root_answer` function is the entry point to solve a `Goal`. Up until now,
the idea of `Answer` versus `CompleteAnswer` have been ignored. However, in
reality `Answer`s to `Goal`s may actually have delayed subgoals (see `ExClause`
and `Coinduction and refinement strands`), whereas `CompleteAnswer`s may not.
`root_answer` essentially just wraps `ensure_root_answer` and converts the
`Goal`'s `Answer` to a `CompleteAnswer`.

The `ensure_root_answer` function contains to core skeleton of the logic around
`Strand` and subgoal selection. The majority of the logic, however, is split out
into separate functions that branch out from `ensure_root_answer`.

## Subgoal selection

Once a given `Strand` for a table has been selected, a subgoal has to be
selected. If there are no subgoals left, then there is nothing to do. Otherwise,
if there are subgoals left, then a subgoal will attempt to be selected (from
[`next_subgoal_index`](https://rust-lang.github.io/chalk/chalk_engine/context/trait.Context.html#tymethod.next_subgoal_index)).
If the table for that subgoal had previously floundered (see next section), then
we mark that subgoal as floundered and try the next subgoal. If all subgoals are
marked as floundered, then this entire `Strand` is marked as floundered. If a
subgoal is successfully selected, there is nothing left to do.

## Floundering

There a couple cases where we "give up" - here called floundering - on trying to
solve a goal. The most easy to understand case is if the types for a `Goal` or
`Answer` are too large. (Side note, we *could* actually handle this - by
generalizing - but turns out to be quite buggy and probably unnecessary).
Another case where we flounder is if we try to solve a `Goal` where we try to
**enumerate** non-enumerable types (like auto traits). In general, floundering
just means that we *can't* know any more answers about a `Goal`, for some
reason. However, if there are other `Strands` that don't flounder, there may
still be other `Answer`s available.

## Answers

After an answer has been found for a subgoal, it must be *applied* to the parent
`Strand`. Specifically, it must be able to unify with any existing `Answers`. If
the `Answer`s are incompatible, the `Strand` is dropped since it can't lead
anywhere.

## Cycles

If while pursuing a `Goal`, the engine encounters the same `Table` twice, then a
cycle has occured. If the cycle is not coinductive (see next), then there is
nothing that can be gained from taking this route. We mark how far up the stack
is in the cycle, and try the next `Strand`. If all `Strand`s for a table
encounter a cycle, then we know that the current selected `Goal` has no more
answers.

## Coinduction and refinement strands

Coinduction basically means that two statements can rely on each other being
true, unless either is proven false.

For example with the following program:
```notrust
#[coinductive]
trait C1<T> { }
forall<A, B> { A: C1<B> if B: C1<A> }
```
Then the goal `exists<T, U> { T: C1<U> }` holds for all `T` and `U`. If the `C1`
trait was not coinductive, this would be a simple cycle.

To implement coinduction in the engine, delayed subgoals were introduced.
Essentially, if a cycle is found, and the `Goal` is coinductive, then this is
"delayed" until the stack unwinds back to the top `Goal` and all other
non-coinductive cycles have been proven. Then, `Goal` has been proven itself. In
some cases, it is the *root* `Goal` that has delayed coinductive subgoals (see
above example). In this case, we create another "Refinement Strand" where the
only subgoals are the delayed coinductive subgoals. If this new `Strand` can be
proven, then any `Answer`s from that are valid answers for the root `Goal`.
However, since there are currently delayed coinductive subgoals, there are no
answers available yet.


[`Context`]: https://rust-lang.github.io/chalk/chalk_engine/context/trait.Context.html
[`HhGoal`]: https://rust-lang.github.io/chalk/chalk_engine/hh/enum.HhGoal.html
[`Stack`]: https://rust-lang.github.io/chalk/chalk_engine/stack/struct.Stack.html
